---
layout: post
title:  "Building Maximally Localized Wannier Functions"
date:   2024-12-23 20:44:51 +0100
layout: default
title:    Calculating Crystal Field Splitting via Wannier Functions
categories: post
author: Valentina Mazzotti
bibliography:
  - bibliography.bib
  - https://example.com/my/remote/bibtex.bib
---
# Introduction

One of the foundational concepts in the theory of transition metal (TM)
oxides is the interaction of a TM ion with the electrostatic potential
created by its surrounding ions, known as the crystal field
[^griffith1961theory]. Crystal field theory predicts that in transition
metal oxides, particularly in perovskites, the $$d$$-orbitals of the TM
cation split into two energy levels: the lower-energy $$t_{2g}$$ orbitals
and the higher-energy $$e_g$$ orbitals, separated by the crystal field
splitting energy. This splitting results from the interaction between
the $$d$$-electrons of the TM ion and the electrostatic field generated by
surrounding anions, influencing phenomena such as magnetism, Mott
insulating behavior, and Jahn-Teller distortions [@CFT_Theory]. For the
past 30 years, density functional theory (DFT) has been the dominant
method for the quantum mechanical simulation of periodic systems, as it
provides a computationally efficient approach for studying the
electronic structure of atoms, molecules, and solids [@DFT]. While the
electronic ground state of a periodic system is often described using
extended Bloch orbitals, an alternative representation in terms of
localized \"Wannier functions\" was introduced by Gregory Wannier in
1937 [@Marzari2012]. By combining DFT with maximally localized Wannier
functions (MLWFs) [@Marzari1997], we can calculate the on-site energies
of $d$-orbitals and determine the crystal field splitting in transition
metal oxides [@Scaramucci2014]. In this study, we apply this approach to
two perovskites, and , reconstructing the electronic structure to
extract crystal field splitting values. In this work, we investigate the
crystal field splitting in the perovskites and by reconstructing their
electronic structures using density functional theory (DFT) combined
with maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs). By constructing sets
of Wannier functions corresponding to different energy windows, we
successively isolate the effects of hybridization with various ligand
states and identify the hybridization component in the derived crystal
field splitting. The paper is organized as follows: I will present the
theory of CFT and the construction of MLWF in the Theory section, then I
will briefly present the workflow that I used to construct a simplified
yet accurate description of the electronic structure, allowing me to
derive the crystal field splitting. We then present results for two
perovskite oxide, where we evaluate the effect of

## Crystal field splitting in octahedral complexes

Crystal field theory (CFT) describes the breaking of degeneracies of
electron orbital states, usually $d$ or $f$ orbitals, due to a static
electric field produced by a surrounding charge distribution (the anion
neighbors) [@bethe1929termaufspaltung]. As a ligand approaches the metal
ion, the electrons from the ligand will be closer to some of the
d-orbitals and farther away from others, causing a loss of degeneracy,
and giving rise to the characteristic energy splitting of the
d-orbitals. This split is influenced by factors such as the metal's
oxidation state, ligand geometry and arrangement, the coordination
number, and the type of ligands [@penney1932influence], which means that
each system has its own crystal field splitting, and precise derivations
of its value can only be found either by experiment or by *ab-initio*
calculations on the system itself. The most common type of complex
investigated in CFT is octahedral, in which six ligands form the
vertices of an octahedron around the metal ion. Taking as an example, we
can illustrate the crystal field splitting of the $d$-orbitals in an
octahedral complex. In SrVO$_3$, the vanadium (V) atom, shown in light
blue in Fig. [1](#fig:SrVO3_structure){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:SrVO3_structure"}, is positioned at the center of an
octahedron formed by six surrounding oxygen (O) atoms (red). This
octahedral arrangement of ligands (O$^{2-}$ anions) creates a crystal
field that interacts with the $d$-orbitals of the central V$^{4+}$ ion,
which has a $3d^1$ electron configuration. In octahedral symmetry, the
$d$-orbitals split into two sets with an energy difference,
$\Delta_{\text{oct}}$ [@InfluenceOfCrystallineFields; @CFT_Theory]. In
this environment, the $d_{xy}$, $d_{xz}$, and $d_{yz}$ orbitals
experience less repulsion from the ligands and are therefore lower in
energy, collectively referred to as the $t_{2g}$ set. In contrast, the
$d_{z^2}$ and $d_{x^2-y^2}$ orbitals, which are oriented directly
towards the ligands, experience higher repulsion and form the
higher-energy $e_g$ set.

![ serves as a prototypical example of a transition metal oxide, where
the $3d$ orbitals of V$^{4+}$ ions experience crystal field splitting
due to the surrounding oxygen ligands, resulting in a characteristic
separation between the $t_{2g}$ and $e_g$ orbitals
[@Scaramucci2014].](figs/SrVO3_poscar.PNG){#fig:SrVO3_structure
width="\\linewidth"}

## Construction of Maximally Localized Wannier Functions

The electronic states within a solid are typically represented by Bloch
states, which correspond to the eigenfunctions of the single-particle
Hamiltonian for electrons in the periodic effective crystal potential.
Since in this work we are employing density functional theory (DFT), the
effective crystal potential in this case is represented by the Kohn-Sham
potential, which consists of the electrostatic Coulomb potential
generated by the nuclei, as well as the Hartree and exchange-correlation
contributions due to electron-electron interactions. Bloch states are
characterized by a wave vector $\mathbf{k}$ within the first Brillouin
zone (BZ) and a band index $n$, making the Hamiltonian diagonal in this
basis:

$$\hat{H} = \sum_{n\mathbf{k}} \varepsilon_{n\mathbf{k}} a^{\dagger}_{n\mathbf{k}} a_{n\mathbf{k}}.$$

Here, $a^{\dagger}_{n\mathbf{k}}$ is the creation operator for an
electron in the Bloch state $|\psi_{n\mathbf{k}}\rangle$, and
$\varepsilon_{n\mathbf{k}}$ is the corresponding single-particle energy.
annier functions, on the other hand, can be a powerful tool in the study
of the electronic and dielectric properties of materials: acting as the
solid-state counterpart to \"localized molecular orbitals\" [@Boys1966],
they provide an insightful picture of the chemical bonding, which is
instead missing from the Bloch picture of extended orbitals. By
transforming the occupied electronic manifold into a set of maximally
localized Wannier functions (MLWFs), one gains deeper insights into
chemical coordination and bonding characteristics. The most general
operation that transforms the Bloch orbitals into a set of Wannier
functions \(|w_{\alpha \mathbf{R}}\rangle\) is given by:

$$|w_{\alpha \mathbf{R}}\rangle = \frac{V}{(2\pi)^3} \int_{\text{BZ}} d^3k \, e^{-i \mathbf{k} \cdot \mathbf{R}} \sum_{n} U^{(\mathbf{k})}_{\alpha n} |\psi_{n\mathbf{k}}\rangle.
\label{eq:equation2}$$ where $U^{(\mathbf{k})}$ unitary matrix that
mixes the Bloch functions at the same $\mathbf{k}$-point. The Wannier
orbitals are characterized by a unit cell index $\mathbf{R}$ and an
additional index $\alpha$ that distinguishes different Wannier orbitals
within the same unit cell. Since different choices for the
$\mathbf{k}$-dependent unitary matrix $U^{(\mathbf{k})}$lead to
different Wannier orbitals, these are therefore not uniquely defined by
Equation [\[eq:equation2\]](#eq:equation2){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:equation2"}. To obtain a unique set of Wannier functions,
it is possible to impose a \"gauge\" condition that minimizes the total
quadratic spread
$\Omega = \sum_{\alpha} \left( \langle r^2 \rangle_\alpha - \langle \mathbf{r} \rangle_\alpha^2 \right)$
of the Wannier orbitals. This approach yields what are known as
\"maximally localized Wannier functions\" (MLWFs) [@Marzari1997].

# RESULTS & DISCUSSION

## Workflow

The process of extracting the crystal field splittings begins with the
ionic relaxation of the conventional cell of or . This initial step
optimizes the atomic positions within the unit cell to minimize the
total energy, resulting in the ground-state geometry. Once the structure
is relaxed, a self-consistent field (SCF) calculation is performed to
obtain the ground-state Kohn-Sham energies and wavefunctions. These
results form the basis for the subsequent band structure and density of
states (DOS) calculations.

The band structure is then calculated by tracing the Kohn-Sham
eigenvalues along a predefined path connecting high-symmetry points in
the Brillouin zone. The band structure will then serve as a guide for
selecting the orbitals and the energy range that will be used to build
the TB model. To identify the character of each band, we project the
obtained onto specific orbitals, such as $s$, $p$, and $d$ orbitals.
Based on these projections, initial guesses for the Wannier functions
are selected to serve as the localized basis functions in the TB model.
When building our model, we need to select by default the d orbitals of
the 3d transition metal ion octahedrally coordinated with oxygen, but
there is the questions in which other orbital of which atom are
necessary to add to the tight binding model to truthfully reconstruct
the bandstructure. Moreover, due to the non-uniqueness of Wannier
functions[@CFTWannier], after having selected the appropriate parameters
and initial projections, we use the VASP2WANNIER90 interface
[@Franchini2012] to project the DFT Bloch states onto maximally
localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) centered on the $d$-orbitals of the
$\ch{V^{4+}}$ and $\ch{Ti^{3+}}$ ions. The Wannier90 code [@Mostofi2014]
is then employed to iteratively minimize the spread functional,
resulting in MLWFs centered on the $d$-bands of $\ch{V^{4+}}$ (or
$\ch{Ti^{3+}}$). Finally, the crystal field splitting
$\Delta_{\text{o}}$ is calculated from the on-site energy difference
between the $e_g$ orbitals ($d_{x^2-y^2}$ and $d_{z^2}$) and the
$t_{2g}$ orbitals ($d_{xy}$, $d_{yz}$, and $d_{zx}$) of the 3d
transition metal, as follows:
$$\Delta_{\text{o}} = \frac{\left( \epsilon_{d_{x^2-y^2}} + \epsilon_{d_{z^2}} \right)}{2} - \frac{\left( \epsilon_{d_{xy}} + \epsilon_{d_{yz}} + \epsilon_{d_{zx}} \right)}{3}$$
where each $\epsilon$ represents the on-site energy obtained from the
Wannier-based TB Hamiltonian.

## 

We apply the workflow to derive the crystal field splitting in , a cubic
perovskite where V is in the $4+$ oxidation state with a $3d^1$
configuration. This single $d$-electron experiences octahedral crystal
field splitting into lower-energy $t_{2g}$ and higher-energy $e_g$
orbitals due to interactions with the surrounding oxygen ligands. The
band structure of
(Fig. [2](#fig:SrVO3-bandstructure){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:SrVO3-bandstructure"}) reveals distinct groups of bands
corresponding to V-$d$ ($t_{2g}$ and $e_g$) and O-$p$ orbital
characters, enabling an initial estimate of the crystal field splitting
at approximately $2 \, \text{eV}$.

To quantify this numerically, we first construct MLWFs for only the
$d$-orbital bands, confined to $4 \, \text{eV}$ to $11 \, \text{eV}$
relative to the Fermi energy. This model captures the full crystal field
splitting of the V-$d$ states in . Next, we include the $p$-orbitals of
oxygen, expanding the energy range to $-2 \, \text{eV}$ to
$11 \, \text{eV}$. By constructing a tight-binding model that includes
both V-$d$ and O-$p$ orbitals, we observe that the Wannier functions
(WFs) centered on vanadium become significantly less extended, as seen
in Table [5](#table:wannier-centers-SrVO3-2){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:wannier-centers-SrVO3-2"} in the Appenidx. The bonding
and anti-bonding nature of the V-$t_{2g}$ and O-$2p$ bands explains the
localization trends. WFs from only anti-bonding bands are more extended
due to retained O-$p$ character, as indicated by larger spreads
(Table [4](#table:wannier-centers-SrVO3){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:wannier-centers-SrVO3"}). However, if we expand the
energy window to include both bonding and anti-bonding bands (and
therefore increase the energy range and the number of WFs used in the
tight binding model), the resulting WFs resemble atomic-like V and O
functions more closely, and are therefore more localized. Athough there
remains a small V-$d_{xy}$ component on the O sites to maintain
orthogonality among WFs, this component is considerably reduced compared
to when only the anti-bonding band is used. For both sets, we record the
on-site energies of the -centered $d$-like Wannier functions, which are
tabulated in Table
[3](#table:SrVO3-onsite-energies){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:SrVO3-onsite-energies"}. The crystal field splitting is
then obtained as the difference of the mean V-$e_g$-like and
V-$t_{2g}$-like Wannier function. When comparing the splitting of the
on-site energies between the V-$e_g$-like and V-$t_{2g}$-like Wannier
functions for the two sets (see Table
[1](#table:splitting-SrVO3){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:splitting-SrVO3"}), it is evident that this splitting
is reduced by approximately 1 eV in the second set compared to the
first. This reduction can be attributed to hybridization between the
central V-$d$ orbitals and the $p$-orbitals of the surrounding oxygen
ligands. In the first set, as previously mentioned, hybridization
between the central V-$d$ orbitals and the $p$-orbitals of the
surrounding oxygen ligands enforces significant O-$p$ character on the
V-centered Wannier functions, which contributes to and increases the
crystal field splitting value.

![ Projected band structure of , illustrating the separation between
$t_{2g}$ and $e_g$ states for the vanadium $d$-orbitals and the oxygen
$p$-orbitals. Panel (a) V $t_{2g}$-orbital projected band structure, (b)
V $e_g$-orbital projected band structure, (c) O $p$-orbital projected
band structure, (d) O $s$-orbital projection. From Panel (d), we observe
that none of the band in the displayed energy range has a predominant
O$s$-orbital character. The Fermi Energy is found to be
$4.7546 \, \text{eV}$, and the energy bands are plotted with respect to
it. ](figs/BandStructure_SrVO3.png){#fig:SrVO3-bandstructure
width="\\linewidth"}

::: {#table:splitting-SrVO3}
  ------------------- ---------------------------------------------------- ------------------ ------------------
  **Bands used in**                        **Symbol**                       **Value \[eV\]**   **Error \[eV\]**
  **WFs**                                                                                     
  only V-$d$            $\epsilon_{e_g}^{(d)} - \epsilon_{t_{2g}}^{(d)}$         2.8099             0.0003
  V-$d$ and O-$p$      $\epsilon_{e_g}^{(dp)} - \epsilon_{t_{2g}}^{(dp)}$       1.787616            0.001
  ------------------- ---------------------------------------------------- ------------------ ------------------

  : Crystal field splitting values for different bands included in the
  Wannier construction, with associated errors.
:::

[]{#table:splitting-SrVO3 label="table:splitting-SrVO3"}

Finally, accuracy of our TB modelfor is validated by verifying that the
atomic positions align with the final Wannier centers. Moreover, the WFs
interpolated bandstructure is calculated using both sets of Wannier
functions. We note that both sets of Wannier functions perform equally
well in reconstructing the band structure within the energy range of 2
to 5 eV, where the $d$-orbitals of V dominate the electronic states, as
seen from Figure
[4](#fig:SrVO3-reconstructed-bandstructure){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:SrVO3-reconstructed-bandstructure"}. We note that in the
first set of Wannier functions, where MLWFs were constructed solely for
the $d$-orbital bands, the interpolated band structure naturally
reproduces only the $d$-band contributions.

## 

Similarly, we examine , another cubic perovskite oxide, where Ti is in
the $3+$ oxidation state with a $3d^1$ configuration. The band structure
of , shown in Figure [3](#fig:TiPbO3-bandstructure){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TiPbO3-bandstructure"}, reveals significantly mixed
orbital character compared to . Unlike , which exhibits distinct
$t_{2g}$ and $e_g$ bands due to strong crystal field splitting and
minimal hybridization, the bands in overlap considerably, reflecting a
higher degree of hybridization. We follow a similar workflow as before.
The first set of Wannier functions is constructed using 5 Ti-centered
WFs, focusing on bands between $7 \, \text{eV}$ and $14 \, \text{eV}$
relative to the Fermi energy. For the second set, the energy range is
expanded to $-1.8 \, \text{eV}$ to $14 \, \text{eV}$ to include
$p$-orbital-centered Wannier functions, adding 9 WFs corresponding to
the three oxygen atoms in the unit cell. Finally, the energy range is
extended further to $-11.6 \, \text{eV}$ to $14 \, \text{eV}$,
incorporating $s$-orbital-centered Wannier functions for oxygen and
resulting in a total of 17 WFs in the third set. As shown in
Table [2](#table:splitting-TiPbO3){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:splitting-TiPbO3"}, the crystal field splitting
decreases with the inclusion of oxygen $p$- and $s$-orbital-centered
WFs, similar to the trend observed in . This reduction highlights the
impact of hybridization on the crystal field splitting, as seen in the
first set of WFs, which reconstructs the $d$-orbital bands separately.
Moreover, the smaller set of WFs again results in larger spreads, as
seen by comparing Table
[6](#table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3"} with Table
[7](#table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3-1){reference-type="ref"
reference="table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3-1"}. However, we verify that,
for all three sets, the first WFs have Cartesian coordinates matching
those of the titanium ions, as expected. The interpolated band structure
for all three sets of WFs is reported in
Figure [5](#fig:TiPbO3-reconstructed-bandstructure){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:TiPbO3-reconstructed-bandstructure"} in the Appendix.

![ Projected band structure of $\text{TiPbO}_3$ illustrating the orbital
character contributions from different atomic species. (a) Ti
$t_{2g}$-orbital projected band structure, (b) Ti $e_g$-orbital
projected band structure, (c) O $p$-orbital projected band structure,
and (d) Pb projected band structure. Unlike in $\text{SrVO}_3$, the
bands in $\text{TiPbO}_3$ show significant orbital mixing, with no clear
separation between the $t_{2g}$ and $e_g$ states. The Fermi Energy was
found to be $6.17 \, \text{eV}$, and the energy bands are plotted with
respect to it.
](figs/BandStructure_TiPbO3.png){#fig:TiPbO3-bandstructure
width="\\linewidth"}

::: {#table:splitting-TiPbO3}
  ------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------ ------------------ ------------------
  **Bands used in**                               **Symbol**                        **Value \[eV\]**   **Error \[eV\]**
  **WFs constr**                                                                                      
  only V-$d$                   $\epsilon_{e_g}^{(d)} - \epsilon_{t_{2g}}^{(d)}$          2.230              0.003
  V-$d$ and O-$p$             $\epsilon_{e_g}^{(dp)} - \epsilon_{t_{2g}}^{(dp)}$         0.913             0.003  
  V-$d$, O-$p$, and O-$s$    $\epsilon_{e_g}^{(dps)} - \epsilon_{t_{2g}}^{(dps)}$        0.890              0.001
  ------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------ ------------------ ------------------

  : Crystal field splitting values for different bands included in the
  Wannier construction, with associated errors
:::

[]{#table:splitting-TiPbO3 label="table:splitting-TiPbO3"}

The lack of clear separation among the Ti $t_{2g}$, Ti $e_g$, and O $p$
bands in the band structure of is an indication of the greater degree of
hybridization between the Ti $d$-orbitals and the oxygen $p$-orbitals in
this system. This is further confirmed by the larger difference in
crystal field splitting (more than $1, \, \text{eV}$ as it was for )
obtained from the two distinct sets of Wannier functions: one
constructed using only the bands with $3d$-orbital character and the
other including oxygen orbitals.

# METHODS

## Density functional theory calculations {#density-functional-theory-calculations .unnumbered}

The calculations for the electronic structure of and have been carried
out using DFT with the Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) method
[@ProjectorAugmentedWaveMethod], as implemented in the Vienna ab initio
Simulation Package
 [@Kresse1993; @Kresse1994; @Kresse1996Efficiency; @Kresse1996Efficient]
(VASP) version 5.4.4. The VASP-supplied PBE [@PBE1996] PAW potentials
version 5.4 were used, with the value of the valency of each atomic
sphere being 10 for strontium, 5 for vanadium, 6 for oxygen, and 14 for
both titanium and lead. A plane wave kinetic energy cutoff of 550 eV was
used, together with an electronic convergence threshold of 10$^{-6}$ eV
and a threshold of maximum force of any one ion of 10$^{-2}$ eV
Å$^{-1}$. The NSW parameter in VASP allowed for a maximum of 50 ionic
steps for the system to relax into its ground state. The Brillouin zone
was sampled using a Monkhorst-Pack mesh with a spacing of 0.02 Å$^{-1}$,
and the width of the Gaussian smearing set to 0.01 eV. In all
calculations, we employ non-spin-polarized DFT, as this approach is
consistent with the fact that both and are non-magnetic systems.

## Point-charge model (PCM) {#point-charge-model-pcm .unnumbered}

The classical point charge model is a classical approach used to
estimate the crystal field splitting in transition metal complexes and
solid-state systems. This model represents the simplest form of the
crystal field, where the lattice is replaced by an array of point
charges located at the nuclei of the constituent ions [@Morrison1988],
and the crystal field splitting parameter $\Delta_{\text{o}}$ is
estimated by considering the electrostatic interaction between a central
metal ion and surrounding ligands [@Bethe1929]. For an octahedral
arrangement, the potential $V(r, \theta, \phi)$ at the metal ion due to
ligands can be expanded in spherical harmonics. The dominant term for
crystal field splitting is $V_{40}$, which is proportional to
$\sum_i \frac{q_i}{a^5}$, where $q_i$ are the ligand charges and $a$ is
the metal-ligand distance. This yields the following crystal field
splitting equation:

$$\Delta_{\text{o}} = \frac{5Ze^2}{12\pi\varepsilon_0 a^5} \langle r^4 \rangle = \frac{5k}{3} \frac{Ze^2}{a^5} \langle r^4 \rangle,
\label{eq:CFT_10Dq}$$

where $Z$ is the effective nuclear charge of the ligand ($Z=2$ for
$\ch{O^{2-}}$, $e$ is the elementary charge, $\varepsilon_0$ is the
permittivity of free space, and $\langle r^4 \rangle$ is the average of
the fourth power of the $nd^3$-electron radial coordinate in the
transition metal, which for both and can be estimated to be
$0.173 \times 10^8 pm^4$ [@Rogers2014].

To extract $\Delta_{\text{o}}$ using the PCM, we focused on a single
$\ch{VO_6}$ octahedral unit within the lattice of the relaxed structure
of the conventional unit cell of (or ), and looked at the metal
($\ch{V^{4+}}$)-ligand ($\ch{O^{2-}}$) distances. The metal-ligand
distance in is $a_V = 1.90813 \, \text{\AA}$ and
$a_{Ti} = 1.96092 \, \text{\AA}$ in . Using Equation
[\[eq:CFT_10Dq\]](#eq:CFT_10Dq){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:CFT_10Dq"}, we derived a $\Delta_{\text{o}}$ of
$2.6110  \, \text{eV}$ and $2.2785 \, \text{eV}$ for $\text{SrVO}_3$,
and $\text{TiPbO}_3$, respectively

# Summary & Conclusion

Using the combined capabilities of DFT and the MLWF formalism, we have
investigated the crystal field splitting $\Delta_{\text{o}}$ for
$\ch{V^{4+}}$ in the octahedral environment of $\ch{VO_6}$ in , and for
$\ch{Ti^{3+}}$ of $\ch{TiO_6}$ in . The crystal field splitting was
determined by evaluating the on-site energies of the $d$-orbitals from a
tight-binding (TB) model constructed with Maximally Localized Wannier
Functions (MLWFs), which were designed to closely resemble the atomic
$d$-orbitals of $\ch{V^{4+}}$ (or $\ch{Ti^{3+}}$). First, for , by
constructing a tight binding model using Wannier functions projected
solely onto the $d$-orbitals, we found the crystal field splitting to be
$2.81 \, \text{eV}$. When Wannier functions centered on the $p$-orbitals
of oxygen were also included, the Wannier functions became more
localized, resulting in a reduced crystal field splitting of
$1.79 \, \text{eV}$. This decrease in crystal field splitting
demonstrates the sizeable contribution from hybridization with
surrounding ligand $p$-orbitals to the ligand field, highlighting the
importance of including these interactions in accurate modeling of
crystal field effects. This analysis also allowed us to conclude that
for , the total $e_g$-$t_{2g}$ splitting of $2.69 \, \text{eV}$
comprises contributions from different sources. To isolate the pure
electrostatic contribution to the crystal field splitting, one would
need to compute a set of Wannier functions centered on all orbitals.
Based on the two sets of Wannier functions constructed in this study, we
estimate that approximately $2.81 - 1.79 = 1.02 \, \text{eV}$ arises
from $d$-$p$ hybridization. However, since the $1.79 \, \text{eV}$ value
also likely includes contributions from $d$-$p$ hybridization, a even
more comprehensive Wannier function construction would be needed to
fully disentangle the various contributions to the crystal field
splitting. The tight binding construction for turned out to be more
difficult; none of the three sets of WFs yielded a interpolated
bandstructure that perfectly resembled the DFT-computed bandstructure,
as we were able to derive for As a final step, we compared the above
result obtained using Wannier functions with the prediction from the
classical point charge model (see Methods section for details). Using
this model, we derive a crystal field splitting value of
$2.611  \, \text{eV}$ and $2.2785 \, \text{eV}$ for , and ,
respectively. In both cases, the classical point charge model
overestimates the crystal field splitting compared to the results
obtained using Wannier functions.

::: acknowledgments
I acknowledge the computation time provided by the Quantum Matter
Institute's computing cluster, as well as Professor Joerg Rottler at the
University of British Columbia for granting access to the VASP license.
:::

# 

::: {#table:SrVO3-onsite-energies}
                                            **Only V-$d$**          **V-$d$ + O-$p$**
  ----------------------------------- -------------------------- ------------------------
  $\epsilon_{d_{xy}}$                          6.060837                  4.895412
  $\epsilon_{d_{yz}}$                          6.060826                  4.895382
  $\epsilon_{d_{zx}}$                          6.060827                  4.895382
  **Mean ($\varepsilon_{t_{2g}}$)**     $6.06083 \pm 0.00001$     $4.895392 \pm 0.00001$
  $\epsilon_{d_{x^2-y^2}}$                     8.87040                   6.681992
  $\epsilon_{d_{z^2}}$                         8.87040                   6.684025
  **Mean ($\varepsilon_{e_{g}}$)**     $8.8707115  \pm  0.0003$   $6.6830085 \pm 0.001$

  : Comparison of on-site energies and crystal field splitting values
  for -centered $d$-like Wannier functions constructed using only $3d$
  orbitals versus including both $3d$ and oxygen $p$ orbitals. The
  uncertainties for the $t_{2g}$ and $e_g$ mean values were calculated
  based on the standard deviation divided by the square root of the
  sample size (3 for $t_{2g}$ and 2 for $e_g$). Note: for the 2nd set,
  we are omitting the on-site energies of the 9 WFs centered on the
  p-orbitals of oxygen, as we are only interested in reporting the
  on-site energies of the -centered $d$-like Wannier functions.
:::

[]{#table:SrVO3-onsite-energies label="table:SrVO3-onsite-energies"}

::: {#table:wannier-centers-SrVO3}
   **WF Number**     **Center Coordinates (Å)**     **Spread (Å$^2$)**
  --------------- -------------------------------- --------------------
         1         (1.908129, 1.908129, 1.908129)       3.29851247
         2         (1.908129, 1.908129, 1.908129)       1.95264099
         3         (1.908129, 1.908129, 1.908129)       1.95265841
         4         (1.908129, 1.908129, 1.908129)       3.40400305
         5         (1.908129, 1.908129, 1.908129)       1.95267656

  : WF centers and spreads for vanadium-centered Wannier functions in
  SrVO$_3$, when we only include the d-orbitals of vanadium in the
  construction of the tight binding model.
:::

[]{#table:wannier-centers-SrVO3 label="table:wannier-centers-SrVO3"}

::: {#table:wannier-centers-SrVO3-2}
   **WF Number**     **Center Coordinates (Å)**     **Spread (Å)**
  --------------- -------------------------------- ----------------
         1         (1.908067, 1.908129, 1.906649)     1.27536288
         2         (1.908134, 1.908129, 1.908135)     0.75179643
         3         (1.908129, 1.908129, 1.908142)     0.75175883
         4         (1.907745, 1.908130, 1.908096)     1.31876994
         5         (1.908141, 1.908129, 1.908129)     0.75175691

  : WF centers and spreads for vanadium-centered Wannier functions in
  SrVO$_3$ when we include both the oxygen p orbitals in the
  construction of the tight-binding model.
:::

![ Comparison of DFT computed bandstructure and reconstructed band
structure of using two different sets of Wannier functions (WFs). The
blue lines represent the band structure reconstructed with 5 WFs
centered on the V $d$-orbitals, while the red lines represent the
reconstruction with 14 WFs, including both V $d$-orbitals and O
$p$-orbitals. Although the inclusion of O $p$-orbitals in the Wannier
construction (14 WFs) leads to a more accurate representation of the
full electronic structure, the quality of the Wannier-interpolated band
structure is very similar.
](figs/comparison_SrVO3.png){#fig:SrVO3-reconstructed-bandstructure
width="\\linewidth"}

  **Quantity**                  **Only Ti-$d$**        **Ti-$d$ + O-$p$**
  -------------------------- ---------------------- -------------------------
  $\epsilon_{d_{xy}}$               9.589241                 8.31594
  $\epsilon_{d_{yz}}$               9.58921                 8.315581
  $\epsilon_{d_{zx}}$               9.583362                8.309073
  **Mean ($E_{t_{2g}}$)**     $9.587271 \pm 0.003$   $8.313531333 \pm 0.003$
  $\epsilon_{d_{x^2-y^2}}$         11.899884                9.406448
  $\epsilon_{d_{z^2}}$              11.73462                 9.04755
  **Mean ($E_{e_{g}}$)**      $11.817252\pm 0.08$      $9.226999 \pm 0.2$
  **$\Delta_{\text{o}}$**     $2.229981 \pm 0.001$         0.913467667

  : Comparison of on-site energies and crystal field splitting values
  for -centered $d$-like Wannier functions constructed using only $3d$
  orbitals versus including both $3d$ and oxygen $p$ orbitals. Averages,
  associated uncertainties, and crystal field splitting values are
  shown.

::: {#table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3}
   **WF Number**     **Center Coordinates (Å)**     **Spread (Å$^2$)**
  --------------- -------------------------------- --------------------
         1         (1.990002, 1.965455, 1.963597)      15.56094260
         2         (1.960919, 1.960949, 1.960905)       1.67887288
         3         (1.960903, 1.960921, 1.960912)       1.68398896
         4         (1.941535, 1.952037, 1.965810)      18.87839696
         5         (1.960920, 1.960955, 1.960918)       1.67569860

  : WF centers and spreads for vanadium-centered Wannier functions in ,
  when we only include the d-orbitals of titanium in the construction of
  the tight binding model.
:::

::: {#table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3-1}
   **WF Number**     **Center Coordinates (Å)**     **Spread (Å$^2$)**
  --------------- -------------------------------- --------------------
         1         (2.043523, 2.051313, 2.088552)       8.20037992
         2         (1.960849, 1.961052, 1.960702)       0.78445781
         3         (1.960981, 1.961029, 1.960914)       0.78540027
         4         (1.939829, 1.947476, 2.053274)       8.27652261
         5         (1.960853, 1.960899, 1.961115)       0.79083593

  : WF centers and spreads for titanium-centered Wannier functions in
  when we include the d-orbitals of titanium and the oxygen p orbitals
  in the construction of the tight-binding model.
:::

[]{#table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3-1
label="table:wannier-centers-TiPbO3-1"}

![ Comparison of DFT computed bandstructure and reconstructed band
structure of using three different sets of Wannier functions (WFs). The
blue lines represent the band structure reconstructed with 5 WFs
centered on the Ti $d$-orbitals, while the red lines represent the
reconstruction with 14 WFs, including both Ti $d$-orbitals and O
$p$-orbitals. The orange line represents the interpolated band structure
using 17 WFs, including both Ti $d$-orbitals and O $p$-orbitals. .
](figs/comparison_TiPbO3.png){#fig:TiPbO3-reconstructed-bandstructure
width="\\linewidth"}

[^1]: A footnote to the article title

**References**:

[^griffith1961theory]: J. S. Griffith, The theory of transition-metal ions (Cambridge university press, 1961).

