---
layout: default
title:  "Measurement of Johnson Noise"
date:   2024-12-25 20:44:51 +0100
categories: [projects]
author: Valentina Mazzotti
---
Johnson noise was discovered and first measured at Bell Labs in 1926
during experiments focused on quantifying noise in electronic circuits.
It was found out that there was an irreducible low level of noise in
resistors whose power was proportional to temperature and which happens
regardless of any applied voltage ([Johnson, 1928](https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.32.97)). Harry Nyquist, a
theorist at Bell Labs, was then able to explain the phenomenon by
referring to the equipartition theorem of classical statistical
mechanics, which then led to the conceptual derivation of Johnson noise
as random fluctuations in the voltage across the terminal of a resistor
as a result of the thermal agitation of electrons in the resistor
itself. Johnson noise does not depend on the material or configuration
of the electrical circuit in which it is observed. As it is instead
directly proportional to the Boltzmann constant $k_b$, our aim in this
paper will be to test whether a straightforward measurement of Johnson
noise inside a simple circuit can yield an accurate experimental value
for this fundamental constant of nature. The model that led to the
explanation of Johnson noise is represented by an electrical
transmission line connected at one end to a resistor $R$ and at the
other end by an equivalent resistor $R$. By treating the given wire as a
one- dimensional example of black body radiation, Nyquist asserted that
the first resistor $R$ generates a noise voltage which will propagate
down the transmission line and which can be modelled as the permitted
standing wave modes for electromagnetic waves along a wire. By applying
the equipartition theorem of classical statistical mechanics, which
states that energy is shared equally amongst all energetically
accessible degrees of freedom of a system, one can derive that the mean
thermal energy contained in each electromagnetic mode in the
transmission line, in the limit $\frac{hf}{k_bT}\rightarrow 0$, must be
$\langle E(f) \rangle= \frac{hf}{e^{\frac{hf}{k_bT}}-1} \approx k_bT$.
Therefore, every mode of the electrical oscillation measured along a
wire suffering from Johnson noise must contribute approximately $k_BT$
average energy to the total electrical oscillation[@PhysRev.32.110]. By
treating the frequency domain, over which the normal modes are
considered, as continuous, each infinitesimal frequency band $df$
contributes $dP = k_bTdf$ to the total average power of the oscillation.
Hence, by modelling Johnson's noise as a voltage source representing the
noise of a non-ideal resistor in series with an ideal noise-free
resistor, Nyquist derived that over an infinitesimal frequency range
$df$, the contribution to the infinitesimal mean-squared noise voltage
from this thermal agitation (i.e. Johnson noise) must be given as
$$\label{eqn:equation1}
    \langle dV_{JN}^2\rangle = 4k_bRTdf$$ The natural way to quantify
noise, which is spread over a range of frequencies, is in terms of the
amount of noise (power or $V^2$) per unit frequency. If we, therefore
integrate Equation
[\[eqn:equation1\]](#eqn:equation1){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:equation1"} over a narrow band of frequencies $\Delta f$
and then divide the obtained expression for the mean-squared noise by
the bandwidth over which the noise is measured, we derive the total
power dissipated by the noise signal in the circuit per hertz of
bandwidth $$\label{eqn:equation2}
 \frac{\langle dV_{JN} \rangle ^2}{Hz} = 4k_{b}RT$$ where $k_{b}$ is
Boltzmann's constant in $\frac{J}{K}$, $T$ is the resistor's absolute
temperature in Kelvin $K$, and $R$ is the resistor value in Ohms
($\Omega$). As the noise power per bandwidth in Equation
[\[eqn:equation2\]](#eqn:equation2){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:equation2"} is independent of frequency, it must the same
for equal frequency intervals; the frequency spectrum is flat and
Johnson noise is therefore said to be "white noise". Equation
[\[eqn:equation2\]](#eqn:equation2){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:equation2"} thus yields a powerful relation between the
mean-squared noise voltage and the thermal parameters $k_b$ and $T$. We
can therefore determine Johnson noise by measuring the RMS voltage
fluctuation per unit bandwidth across the terminals of different
resistors in equilibrium at a fixed room temperature $T$ and confirm the
validity of Nyquist's theorem by using the literature value of $k_b$.
Alternatively, we can use Nyquist's theorem (Equation
[\[eqn:equation2\]](#eqn:equation2){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:equation2"}) and the measured RMS voltage fluctuations to
derive from the obtained Johnson noise measurements a value for the
Boltzmann constant $k_b$.

The Johnson noise that is to be measured is on the scale of nanovolts,
far below the ability of most conventional electronics to detect, hence,
a low-noise high-gain amplifier is used to amplify the noise and measure
it. The mean-squared voltage noise at the output of the amplifier must
then be adjusted for gain in order to account for any amplification that
the system has on a given frequency. If we define $g(f)$ to be the
function that governs the gain of the amplifier for a given frequency of
the input signal, we can express the mean-squared voltage noise at the
output of the amplifier as
$\langle dV_{rms}^2 \rangle= 4k_{b}RTg^2(f)df$. We define the gain
integral $G$ to be the integral of $g^2(f)$ over the bandwidth we
measure the noise over, namely
$G(f_1, f_2)= \int_{f_1}^{f_2} g^2(t)\,df\ $. Hence, the total power
dissipated by the noise signal over a given bandwidth while accounting
for the gain of the amplifier is given by
$\langle V_{rms}^2 \rangle= 4k_{b}RTG(f_1, f_2)$, such that Johnson
noise per unit frequency becomes
$\langle V_{JN}^2 \rangle  =\frac{\langle V_{rms}^2 \rangle}{G}$. where
$\langle V_{rms}^2 \rangle$ represents the amplified noise we measure
using the soundcard.

The experimental setup as well as the calibration measurements that were
performed prior to the actual measurement of Johnson noise are now
described. As we are aiming to measure a noise voltage signal that is
smaller in magnitude than most of the other noise sources coming from
the environment, it is crucial that we first shield each resistor we are
measuring the noise across from external noise sources. To do so, we
insert the resistor inside a hollow copper tube that can be connected
via two terminals to other electrical components. The Johnson noise
experimental setup consisted, therefore, of a copper tube, containing
the resistor, connected via a BNC cable to a high-gain voltage
amplifier. The output of the amplifier was then connected, as shown in
[4](#fig:circuit){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:circuit"}, via an
AUX cable to a Stereo Audio USB External Sound Card, in order to read
the RMS voltage of the amplified signal. This configuration allowed us
to connect the resistor directly to the amplifier while shielding it at
the same time from all the electromagnetic radiation of the surrounding
environment.

![(a) Gain of the voltage amplifier as a function of the frequency of
the input signal plotted on a log scale. (b) The gain of the voltage
amplifier as a function of the frequency of the input signal on a log
scale for frequencies in the range $300$ Hz to $2400$ Hz, where we
observe a constant gain of $\sim$`<!-- -->`{=html}2000. The solid red
line represents the polynomial fit of order 4 performed on the gain of
the voltage amplifier in the given interval. (c) Measured calibration
factor of the sound card as a function of the frequency of the generated
signal on a log scale. The calibration factor is constant at a value of
$\sim0.109$ for frequencies in the range $100$ Hz to and $7000$ Hz,
increases slightly to $0.11$ for frequencies above $8000$ Hz and
increases significantly to a value of $0.155$ for a signal of frequency
equal to $10$ Hz. We will choose a bandwidth that does not include low
frequencies ($<50Hz$) for which the soundcard does not yield a reliable
calibration factor.](JNM-Final Draft/calib.pdf){#calib}

The amplifier includes multiple internally compensated operational
amplifiers, that tend to be designed to have gain that rolls off at some
frequency in order to ensure that the circuits in which they are used do
not oscillate or go unstable when used in a negative-feedback
configuration. Hence, the gain of a voltage amplifier changes with the
frequency of the input signal and has a specific frequency range for
which it delivers an optimal gain[@6908352]. A frequency analysis of the
amplifier's gain was therefore performed and the gain curve we obtained
was then fitted to a polynomial function. This allowed us to derive a
mathematical expression for $g(f)$ (namely a piecewise function) that
describes the gain as a function of frequency and then use it to compute
the gain integral $G(f_1, f_2)= \int_{f_1}^{f_2} g^2(t)\,df\ $ over a
certain bandwidth. A sinusoidal function generator was used to calibrate
the gain curve and a Stereo Audio USB External Sound Card, as well as an
oscilloscope, were deployed to read the RMS voltage of the amplified
signal. One of the advantages of using the soundcard to measure the
amplified noise signal is that we can display the converted sound signal
using the software Audacity. As the calibration factor of the soundcard
fluctuates with the frequency of the input signal as well, a frequency
analysis of the calibration factor was necessary before using the
soundcard as a tool to measure the RMS voltage signal. The frequency
dependence of the calibration factor was derived and is displayed in
\[Fig.Â [1](#calib){reference-type="ref" reference="calib"}\]. The
uncertainty in the value of the square of the gain of the amplifier was
determined by simple error propagation, yielding $\sigma_{g^2}=\pm5.2$.
Analogously, the uncertainty in the calibration factor was derived to be
$\pm 0.018V$.

<figure id="fig:circuit">
<figure id="fig:circuit">
<p><embed src="JNM-Final Draft/Circuit_diagram.pdf" /> <span
id="fig:circuit" data-label="fig:circuit"></span></p>
</figure>
<figure id="fig:powerspectra">
<embed src="JNM-Final Draft/comparison.pdf" />
<figcaption aria-hidden="true"></figcaption>
</figure>
<figcaption>(a) Schematic experimental setup. A resistor <span
class="math inline"><em>R</em></span> inside a copper tube is connected
via a BNC cable to a voltage amplifier connected to a power source <span
class="math inline"><em>P</em><em>S</em></span> (battery). The output
voltage of the amplifier is measured by a sound card connected via a USB
cable to a laptop. (b) Semilog plot of the power spectral density of the
RMS voltage fluctuations for different resistors ranging from 18 <span
class="math inline"><em>Î©</em></span> to 226 <span
class="math inline"><em>k</em><em>Î©</em></span> versus frequency. In the
power spectral density plot for resistors with lower resistance, we
observe an almost flat power spectral density that is characteristic of
Johnson noise (and of any type of "white noise"). As the resistance
increases, the power spectral density plot becomes steeper, in agreement
with the fact that for small resistances, the contribution of Johnson
noise to the total noise across the resistor is significant, while it
becomes less significant for larger values of resistance <span
class="math inline"><em>R</em></span> where current noise starts
becoming the dominant source of noise.</figcaption>
</figure>

Once we have performed the frequency analysis of the amplifier and the
calibration of the soundcard and assessed the uncertainties of both
measurements, we can use the soundcard to measure the amplified RMS
voltage fluctuations across various resistors. The recorded voltage
fluctuations were exported as $.wav$ files such that we could analyse
the signal for a given resistance $R$ by computing the power spectral
density of it using a periodogram. The average of the power spectral
density for the RMS voltage signal across each resistor (for a given
bandwidth) yields the average noise $V_{out}$ per unit frequency
measured across each resistor. However, by connecting the resistor $R$
to the input of an amplifier, we are confronted with a new circuit
configuration that introduces two additional and distinct noises,
generated by the amplifier itself: current and voltage noise [@article].
If the resistor is connected across the input of a high-gain amplifier
with gain function $g(f)$, then the infinitesimal mean-squared voltage
measured at the output of the amplifier will now be given by
$dV_{out}=g(f)(dV_{JN}+dV_{A}^{in})df$, where $V_{JN}$ represents the
random voltage fluctuations due to Johnson noise and
$V_{A}^{in}=V_{A}^{IR}+V_{A}^{V}$ the voltage signal resulting from both
the current and voltage noise of the amplifier, respectively. Using the
fact that uncorrelated noise voltages add in a root-sum-of-squares
manner, we can express the total infinitesimal power dissipated by the
circuit for an infinitesimal frequency range $df$ by simply adding the
infinitesimal contribution of each noise source to the infinitesimal
magnitude of the total noise power $dS_{out}$
$$\label{eqn:infinitesimalS}
    dS_{out}=g(f)^2df\times(dS_{JN}+dS_{IR}+dS_{V} (f)).$$ Where
$dS_{JN}$ represents Johnson noise, $dS_{IR}$ and $dS_{V}$ current and
voltage noise from the amplifier, respectively. In Equation
[\[eqn:infinitesimalS\]](#eqn:infinitesimalS){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:infinitesimalS"}, we have assumed that the voltage noise
due to the amplifier is at the input of the amplifier and gets amplified
along with the current and Johnson noise. This assumption allows us to
derive a simplified model for the total noise measured across each
resistor. However, we acknowledge the fact that the mathematical model
displayed in Equation
[\[eqn:infinitesimalS\]](#eqn:infinitesimalS){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:infinitesimalS"} represents an approximation of the real
behaviour of the total power dissipated in the circuit. We define the
gain integral $G(f_1,f_2)$ to be the integral of the squared fitted gain
function $g(f)$ over the bandwidth $(f_1, f_2)$. We calculate the gain
integral numerically using Simpson's rule [@article] over the same
bandwidth we measure the noise over. By integrating Equation
[\[eqn:infinitesimalS\]](#eqn:infinitesimalS){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:infinitesimalS"} over a certain bandwidth $(f_1, f_2)$,
we can express the total noise power of the circuit over a certain
frequency range as a function of the gain integral (calculated for the
given bandwidth) and add the contribution of each noise to the total
magnitude of the noise power $S_{out}=G\times(S_{JN}+S_{IR}+S_{V} (f))$,
where $G(f_1, f_2)= \int_{f_1}^{f_2} g^2(t)\,df\ $, $S_{JN}$ represents
the power dissipated due to Johnson noise, $S_{IR}$ and $S_{V}$ the
current and the voltage noise of the amplifier, respectively, over a
bandwidth $(f_1,f_2)$.

By using Ohm's law $V=IR$ and Nyquist's theorem
([\[eqn:2\]](#eqn:2){reference-type="ref" reference="eqn:2"}), we can
modify Equation
[\[eqn:infinitesimalS\]](#eqn:infinitesimalS){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:infinitesimalS"} and model the total noise power such
that we can distinguish between the three distinct types of noise
involved. Let Johnson noise per bandwidth be $S_{JN}= 4 k_bRT$ and
current noise be $S_IR=(V_{A}^IR )^2 =(IR)^2=S_I R^2$, then
$$\label{eqn:model}
     S_{out} =G\times(4 k_bRT+ S_I R^2+ S_V)$$

We observe that only the first two terms are dependent on the resistance
at the input of the circuit. While current noise $S_{IR}$ grows
quadratically as a function of $R$, Johnson noise $S_{JN}$ is in a
linear relationship with $R$. Thus, by measuring the RMS voltage
fluctuations per unit bandwidth across the terminals of different
resistors, over a fixed bandwidth, we can derive the power dissipated by
each resistor in the circuit and relate it to both the current and
Johnson noise with appropriate fitting. As current noise grows
quadratically with resistance, we expect it to become the dominant
source of noise for large values of $R$. However, we can exploit the
fact that there exists a certain range of values for $R$ for which the
resistance is small enough in order to observe a significant
contribution of Johnson noise to the overall noise $S_{out}$ in the
circuit. According to Equation
[\[eqn:equation2\]](#eqn:equation2){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:equation2"}, Johnson noise per bandwidth is equal to
$4kbR$ and we can therefore model the contribution of Johnson noise to
the total noise as a linear function of resistance $R$. Johnson noise
was derived from the noise power (per unit frequency) in the range of R
for which there exists a linear relationship between the total noise
power of the signal and $R$.

We measured 4 times the RMS voltage fluctuations across 25 different
resistors with resistance ranging from $18\Omega$ to $226 k\Omega$. A
bandwidth of $1050Hz$ was chosen and kept fixed for all resistors, such
that we could use the constant calibration factor $c=0.10$ we previously
derived. We find that $18 \Omega$-$50k\Omega$ represents a range of R
where the total noise in the circuit is not dominated yet entirely by
the current noise. In fact, a linear relationship between the power
noise and the resistance values between $18 \Omega$ and $55.81 k\Omega$
seems to hold. Above $55.81k\Omega$, the contribution by current noise
to the total noise $S_{out}$ becomes dominant and we observe that
$S_{out}$ starts increasing not linearly anymore. To confirm this and to
derive numerical values used to calculate $k_b$, we fit the data for
$S_{out}$ to a quadratic polynomial function $f(R)=aR^2+bR+d$, where the
first, 2nd and 3rd term represents contributions to the total noise in
the circuit by the current, Johnson and voltage noise, respectively.

<figure id="fig:figures">
<figure id="fig:first">
<p><embed src="JNM-Final Draft/fitting.pdf" /> <span id="fig:first"
data-label="fig:first"></span></p>
</figure>
<figure id="fig:second">
<p><embed src="JNM-Final Draft/residuals.pdf" /> <span id="fig:second"
data-label="fig:second"></span></p>
</figure>
<figcaption>(a) Plot of the measured values for <span
class="math inline">$\frac{V^2_{rms}}{G}$</span> versus resistance <span
class="math inline"><em>R</em></span> with the fitted function <span
class="math inline"><em>f</em>(<em>R</em>)</span> for all the resistance
values between <span class="math inline">18<em>Î©</em></span> and <span
class="math inline">260<em>Î©</em></span>. (b) Plot of the measured
values for <span class="math inline">$\frac{V^2_{rms}}{G}$</span> as
well as the values of <span
class="math inline">$\frac{V^2_{rms}}{G}$</span> of the cross-correlated
signal versus resistance <span class="math inline"><em>R</em></span>
with the fitted function <span
class="math inline"><em>f</em>(<em>R</em>)</span> for small values of
<span class="math inline"><em>R</em></span> where a linear relationship
between <span class="math inline">$\frac{V^2_{rms}}{G}$</span> and <span
class="math inline"><em>R</em></span> holds. The plot shows that the
cross-correlated signal differs significantly from the original signal
for small values of resistances. (c) A plot of the residuals of the
fitted model <span class="math inline"><em>f</em>(<em>R</em>)</span>
versus resistance <span class="math inline"><em>R</em></span>. The
residual plots are randomly distributed around 0 and there is no trend
in the residual plot, which suggests that the total noise <span
class="math inline">â¨<em>d</em><em>V</em><sub><em>R</em><em>M</em><em>S</em></sub>â©<sup>2</sup></span>
can be modelled as a quadratic function given by Equation <a
href="#eqn:model" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="eqn:model">[eqn:model]</a> in this resistance
range.</figcaption>
</figure>

As a final consideration in the numerical derivation of Johnson noise
and the Boltzmann constant $k_b$, we need to take into account that we
are reading the RMS voltage using a digital soundcard with average
calibration factor of $c=0.11 \frac{V}{a.u.}$. The real amplified noise
$S_{rms}$ (in units of $\frac{V^2}{Hz}$) is given by
$S_{rms}=S_{out}\times c^2$. As we are measuring the noise over the
frequency interval $300Hz-1350Hz$ for which we can assume a constant
calibration factor $c$, we can simply multiply the values for $S_{out}$
by the value of the calibration factor squared,
$c^2=0.0121 \frac{V}{a.u.}$, before fitting it to the function $f(R)$.
We will not present the explicit RMS voltages obtained for each
resistor, however, we note that the measured RMS voltage, adjusted for
gain and the calibration factor, ranged from about $1.74nV$ for the
$18\Omega$ resistor to about $51.7 nV$ for the $226 k\Omega$. We note
that the (relative) residual between the measured RMS voltage and the
Johnson noise value as predicted by Nyquist,
$r=\frac{V_{rms} - \sqrt{4k_bRT)}}{V_rms}$ is smaller for smaller
resistance values; in agreement with the fact that Johnson noise becomes
less significant as a noise source for larger values of $R$.

In an attempt to extract Johnson Noise from the total noise in the
circuit and derive a more accurate value for the Boltzmann constant
$k_b$, we will proceed by computing the cross-spectral-density ($CSD$)
of the two signals in the right and the left channel of the sound card.
As the $CSD$ displays the distribution of power for a pair of signals
across a frequency spectrum at any time, it can be used to determine how
correlated two signals are in reference to another [@LARIVOIRE20171].
Since both channels of the sound card are perturbed by uncorrelated
voltage noise signal, we expect that by computing the cross-correlation
of the two different channel signals, we are able to extract the
correlated components of the signal, composed of Johnson and current
noise, and discard the random-generated voltage noise due to the
amplifier. Hence, the real part of the cross-correlated signal will
yield the noise contribution solely due to Johnson noise and the current
noise (namely $S_{out} =G\times(4 k_bRT+ S_I R^2)$). Moreover, as
Johnson noise is the dominant noise for small resistances, we expect
that the cross-correlated signal varies significantly from the original
one for small resistances, as shown in
[7](#fig:figures){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:figures"}. At
higher resistances, where current noise dominates all other forms of
noise, the cross-correlated signal will resemble almost the original
one, as the process of discarding via $CSD$ voltage noise will not
contribute a lot to the change in the total noise recorded by the sound
card.

We plot $\frac{S_{RMS}}{G}$ versus resistance $R$ and fit the measured
values for $\frac{S_{RMS}}{G}$ to the fitting function $f(R)=aR^2+bR+d$
using linear regression. After cross-correlation, as the total noise in
the cross-correlated does not include voltage noise, we should expect
the parameter $d$ to be ideally close to zero, so we will set the
initial guess for $d$ to zero. The fit displayed in
[7](#fig:figures){reference-type="ref" reference="fig:figures"} suggests
an acceptable agreement with the model with a reduced $\chi^2$ value
equal to $1.4079$. From the fit, we find that the coefficient $b$ is
equal to $(1.641e-20 e^{-20} \pm - 6.977e^{-25})\frac{V^2}{RHz}$. Since
$b$ equals the coefficient of the linear term in Equation
[\[eqn:model\]](#eqn:model){reference-type="ref" reference="eqn:model"}
and this linear term represents the contribution of Johnson noise
$S_{JN}$, we derive that the Johnson noise across each resistor R is
given by $S_{JN}=b\times R$. To illustrate an example, we derive a value
for the Johnson noise per unit frequency for the 18$\Omega$ resistor
equal to $S_{JN}= 2.597e^{-20}\frac{V^2}{Hz}$, which is close to the
value for $S_{JN}$ predicted by Nyquist's theorem
($2.960e^{-20}\frac{V^2}{Hz}$). The coefficient $a$ of the quadratic
term is $a=2.378e^{-27} \pm 4.500e^{-30}$ and the constant $d$ is
$d=1.694e^{-19} \pm 1.083e^{-20}$. According to Equation
[\[eqn:model\]](#eqn:model){reference-type="ref" reference="eqn:model"},
the quadratic term $S_IR^2$ represents the contribution of current noise
so that the fitted coefficient $a$ is equal to $S_I$. For each
resistance $R$, the current noise in the circuit will then be given by
$S_I\times R^2=a\times R^2$. In the simplified model displayed in
Equation [\[eqn:model\]](#eqn:model){reference-type="ref"
reference="eqn:model"}, the constant term $d$ represents $S_v$, namely
the contribution of voltage noise, which is independent of resistance,
to the total noise. Prior to computing the cross-correlation of the
signal, we fitted our quadratic model to the original noise signal
recorded by the sound card. As the fitted value $d$ for the original
signal was obtained to be negative ($-1.845e^{-17}$), we concluded that
this value cannot represent the correct average value for voltage noise
and that we need to acknowledge the fact that the model in
[\[eqn:model\]](#eqn:model){reference-type="ref" reference="eqn:model"}
is not suited to derive a numerical value for the voltage noise.
Instead, when fitting the cross-correlated signal to the same quadratic
model, we got a fitted value for the parameter $d$ equal to
$1.694e^{-20} \pm  1.694e^{-21}$. Although not equal to zero as we
predicted (as the new signal should ideally not include any contribution
from voltage noise), the new fitted value for $d$ is more than 3
magnitudes smaller than the one obtained for the original signal, prior
to $CSD$. Hence, we can conclude that $CSD$ proved to be effective in
discarding the random-generated voltage noise from the total noise of
the signal. Moreover, by introducing cross-correlation, we were able to
derive a new fitted function with an associated $\chi^2$ value of
$1.487$, which is lower in magnitude compared to the $\chi^2$ value of
$2.4079$ associated with the fitted model obtained from the original
(non-cross-correlated) power signal.

Finally, according to Nyquist's model, measurement of the thermal noise
$\langle V_{JN}^2 \rangle$ across any resistor provides a means to
calculate the Boltzmann constant $k_b$, once we fix the room temperature
to be $T=293 K$. Since $\langle V_{JN}^2\rangle =bR$, where $b$ is the
fitted parameter previously derived, we derive a value for the Boltzmann
constant equal to
$k=\frac{b[\frac{V^2}{RHz}]}{4T[K]} =1.4098e^{-23} \frac{J}{K}$. The
absolute error $\simga_{k}$ was calculated using the absolute error in
the fitted value for $b$, namely
$\sigma_{k} = k\sqrt{\frac{\sigma_{b}}{b}}=6.146e^{-28}\frac{J}{K}$.

In conclusion, our results are in acceptable agreement with both
Nyquist's theoretical predictions and the literature value for the
Boltzmann constant. Without the cross-correlation analysis, we derive
from the measurement of Johnson noise, a value of the Boltzmann constant
equal to $k_b = (1.541e-23e^{-23} \pm 5.938e^{-28})J/K$. A significant
improvement in the derived value for $k_b$ was achieved by using the
technique of cross-correlation. In fact, by computing the cross-spectral
density of the signals inside the two channels of the sound card, we
were able to extract the Johnson noise and the current noise from the
total noise in the circuit and derive a more accurate value for the
Boltzmann constant $k_b$, namely $(1.4098e^{-23} \pm 6.146e^{-28})J/K$.
The $\chi^2$ value of the fitted model also proved to be significantly
lower for the cross-correlated signal. The value we derived for $k_$ can
be improved in future measurements by further reducing the external
noise sources as well as by including a larger and broader set of
resistance values across which we can measure Johnson noise. An accurate
derivation of voltage noise (which is frequency dependent) was not
performed and the fitted parameter $d$ can be interpreted as the
contribution of voltage noise to the total noise in the circuit.
Nevertheless, we were able to demonstrate the validity of various
theoretical aspects concerning Johnson noise (i.e. the fact that it has
a flat spectral density and is therefore considered \"white noise\") as
well as deriving a fairly accurate value for the Boltzmann constant
$k_b$.
:::
